this is david barcelona and my guest is
bill shapp editor of the covert action
and information bulletin
and director of the institute for media
analysis
in new york
bill in the summer 1987 issue of covert
action on the cia and drugs
you write in an editorial the cia has
been
from its inception a major source of
opium heroin
and now crack unquote and more recently
on february 10
1988 at columbia university you said the
cia is probably the biggest drug dealer
in the world those are pretty
sensational charges and i was wondering
if you could
give us some documentary evidence well
there's been a great deal
published and exposed about the early
cia
operations unfortunately as is typical
with this kind of
investigation the most current material
is usually much harder to find but
historically i can give you a very quick
rundown among the very early cia
operations shortly after it was created
in the late 40s was a major operation
for example to
suppress a duck workers strike in
marseilles
which was led by communist dominated
trade unions and the cia was very
worried that they would gain an
influence if the strike was successful
they made a deal with the corsican mafia
the very powerful drug lords of that
time
who were responsible for most of the
opium and heroin coming
into europe they made a deal with them
to provide a bunch of
thugs strike breakers who went to
marseille and broke heads and
bones and so on and crushed the strike
the quid pro quo for that help
was to for the u.s to turn
its eyes the other way and to urge its
allies to turn their eyes
with respect to their drug traffic and
this
as far as we know continued for a number
of years
another major cia involvement in drugs
has been very broadly exposed and that
was
their involvement with the heroin
traffic out of southeast asia
during the 60s into the early 70s
there was massive heroin traffic out of
southeast asia being run
by organizations which were working very
closely with the cia and in some
instances the us army as well in the
vietnam war
primarily the uh hmong tribesmen
who worked under a general vang
pao a laotian general who now lives out
in
montana on a ranch he had a major drug
factory which was protected by the cia
because
he was letting his men work as
a secret army for the cia and there was
a
similar operations going on with many
other people in the the golden triangle
area
primarily primarily in laos uh but also
some people
involved in in thailand and burma and so
on it's a pretty
rough country there and when you get out
into the
far reaches there are no really viable
governments there were there were
warlords
uh there are areas of northern burma to
this day that are
being run by refugees from the
guomentang
forces and they're responsible for
a very large portion of all the heroin
in the world and they were getting a lot
of help from the cia
also at least what a lot of our research
leads us to believe is that the cia
itself has been more
directly involved in drug traffic not
not simply turning
turning its eyes away when it's been
necessary either to raise
funds for clandestine operations for
which
other funds were not available or to get
particular individuals to do particular
operations
it's happening now we would
say with respect to the war in central
america
one of the interesting thing that's
things that's come to light
is that the planes supplying the contras
in costa rica and in honduras but
particularly costa rica
are being allowed to land on private
airstrips owned by
gangsters involved in the cocaine
traffic
and the here again the quid pro quo
for letting the contra supply planes
land
is being unmolested in their cocaine
traffic
and indeed as has been shown in several
documentaries on television and a lot of
articles that have appeared
they're even using the same planes in
some instances the planes which fly
supplies down to the contrast fly
drugs back to the united states and this
is going on a regular basis
leslie coburn in her book out of control
talks about this and in a couple
documentaries she did for cbs west 57th
street
let me pose this question to you you
have this network of
as a suggested gun south drugs north
with pilots landing at homestead air
force base in florida
for example and saying that they got
paid 75
000 for the run the
the people that are giving this
testimony are in most cases convicted
criminals they're drug runners they're
professional liars
how can they be credible sources
well that's an objection that's very
often raised and it's something that
prosecutors have to deal with all the
time
by and large the only people who are
going to have any eyewitness testimony
to a criminal operation are going to be
criminals they don't call in
uh the neighborhood bishop off the
street to come in and listen into the
meetings
so that all of the witnesses will have
pretty shabby pass but that doesn't make
them any more less credible
than anyone else the fact is that the
evidence keeps piling up
it's possible that any person could be
lying about a particular story the
there's a logical difficulty though
because it didn't help these people they
were not
telling the they were not getting any
benefits by
telling about this u.s involvement in
fact if anything they were getting more
heat
on them but it's not an uncommon thing
in the past one of the things we've
learned is the cia doesn't usually
change its tricks very much it just
modifies them to the current situation
and they've done this before
there's a whole book been written about
all the different
ways of going in and out with heroin
throughout the the period of the vietnam
war called the politics of heroin in
southeast asia
and that describes many methods which
are being used now in
in central america it's um
it's true that that one or another of
the witnesses uh have criminal records
and it's certainly true that any pilot
who
testifies to this is is someone who has
himself
been flying in drugs
but you're not going to get there's
nobody else on the plane who's going to
tell you about the plane
in an earlier answer you hinted about
something i'm going to ask you about
right now and that is
it just doesn't seem to make sense for
the agency to risk its
its power its prestige its status with
such
an onerous thing as drug trafficking why
would they do it
well they do it for the money i mean
they do it because
it involves huge amounts of money and
that
enables them to get a lot of labor at
leverage with people they want to use
they do the same thing with arms there's
a great deal of arms
trading and trafficking that goes on in
in these similar kind of operations
where they need to build up
money in order to pay other people to do
fight their wars
i think that they're not too worried
about the
appropriation they might get if it came
out because there are so many layers of
deniability there's so much fuzziness
it's so difficult to prove who is
working for whom most of these
operations are not done
with official u.s government employees
involved
when the plane crashes and you get a
haasenfuss or somebody like that
you're not going to get a second
secretary at the u.s embassy on that
plane
nobody like that's going to be on it no
high-ranking cia
official or case officer will be on the
plane or will be actually
handling the drugs they will be the
people coordinating it paying the people
telling everybody who should do what and
they try to
protect themselves that way they also
have many layers by which they insulate
the
funds involved proprietary banks and
and trading corporations and so on and
it's only when somebody talks
for whatever reason that we find out
about these things we don't find out
about them
in a vacuum someone has to decide to to
say something or show somebody where
some documents are
or in rare cases like the the plane
crash uh
documents will be found that that no one
ever intended would be found by by other
people
could you tell us a little bit about how
the structure of
the agency works where how does how do
how do the orders
originate or how are activities
initiated
well one of the things that i think is a
myth that a lot of people
are led to believe or the cia would like
people to believe is that when these
strange activities are uncovered very
often
the cia and the administration of the
day
will announce that something got out of
control somebody was doing something on
their own
we call it the rogue elephant theory or
the loose cannon theory
in fact that's almost never the case if
you read all the books that have been
written by
former cia people left right and center
they they
basically say that almost everything
that's done is
done it is what the administration wants
done
they're following orders they're
executing policy from on high
and occasionally as in as apparently is
the case with with our current
president there may be some things where
the president is not aware
of much of the substance there are many
times things where presidents aren't
aware of the details
but the general thrust of it is clear
the general no matter what reagan did or
didn't know for example about iran gate
conjugate stuff
he had made it very clear to the people
below him that he wanted them to do
whatever was necessary to get
funds to the contras and if what was
necessary involved
arms deals around the world to raise the
funds from the profits to funnel off to
them
they were still doing what he wanted it
was not a shock
that the funds raised were being
funneled to the contras
and that's been the case historically
for for the uh 40 years the cia's been
operating
that they're generally following orders
sometimes very specifically sometimes
somewhat generally and there can be a
lot of discretion
on the part of area chiefs or chiefs of
station or so on but they basically know
what it is
that the policy objective is and
unfortunately
tend to think they're virtually outside
the law in terms of accomplishing it
what might be some legitimate activities
that the cia could engage in for example
isn't the united states isn't the an
administration entitled to have
legitimate
intelligence about foreign activities oh
absolutely
i think that unfortunately that's
another one of those myths that the cia
is
is essentially an intelligence gathering
agency if it were we wouldn't have the
objections that we do
every nation wants to gather
intelligence and every nation has since
time immemorial and for very important
reasons that
leaders of countries have to make very
significant decisions and they want to
know what the facts are they want to
know what's going on
but the fact is that the cia doesn't
spend most of its time
gathering and analyzing intelligence
these days it spends maybe a third of
its time doing
uh paramilitary covert operations
interfering essentially violently in the
fairs of other countries
it spends maybe a third of its time
doing propaganda and
operations media disinformation
campaigns and so on
and less than a third of its time
gathering and analyzing intelligence
in fact in the u.s i would say that far
more intelligence gathering is done
by the national security agency with a
microwave interception i mean they they
can listen to
every word that's broadcast by any radio
or television station in the world
you gather vast amounts of intelligence
that way
there are analysts in langley and at the
nsa and at the state department
everywhere else who read all the
magazines and newspapers and whatnot
that are published and you find a lot of
intelligence that way
but the cia is primarily a covert action
arm of the executive and it's primarily
engaged in interfering in the affairs of
other countries not
learning what's going on in other
countries
but interfering in the other countries
does it have a domestic component as
well oh absolutely i i don't it's not
compartmentalized that way i don't think
except that there is a
liaison with the fbi and with the
justice department
but the another sadly
myth that people believe is that the cia
is not allowed by law to operate in the
united states and there is no such
law there is a law which says it's not
allowed to exercise internal police
although that's not defined and nobody
knows quite what it means it's just that
the
congress in 1947 didn't want a gestapo
but there's no prohibition against
operations in the united states if they
relate to the
the sphere of interest of the
cia foreign foreign affairs and in fact
the reagan administration has been quite
blatant about it the
the carter administration purported to
prohibit
covert operations dirty tricks in the
united states
even if they related to foreign affairs
and the reagan administration changed
the regulations so that they
can conduct pursuant to regulation
dirty tricks in the united states if
they're in furtherance of
of administration foreign policy
objectives
which is a frightening thought in itself
what are some examples of
cia propaganda and media operations in
the united states and abroad
well the the ones abroad are easier to
because so many have been exposed a very
uh well-known one that john stockwell
exposed was the
newspaper campaign about the atrocities
being committed by cuban troops in
angola
there was a long series of newspaper
reports suggesting that cuban troops
were raping angolan women
rampaging through the countryside to the
point where they had to be arrested and
tried and executed by
angolans and in fact none of this was
true it was being made up
at a typewriter in zaire where some of
stockwell's
friends who were experts in propaganda
were sitting down and writing what would
purport to be a news story
then feeding it to an agent who would be
a stringer for some local wire service
who would then
send it off to reuters who would then
send it off to new york and it would
then appear all over
the country as well as all over the
world as a news story emanating from
angola
and in fact it was written by people who
hadn't set foot in angola
and this kind of direct insertion of
news is very common
again even though they were planting the
story in africa
uh in a way that it would get sent to
london
they were still affecting the
public opinion in the united states
because the important thing was the
story being picked up here
it wasn't important that the story would
run in an african newspaper or even a
british newspaper they did these kind of
operations so the stories would run in
the united states
and this is fairly common they run
through
disinformation themes all the time
one of the problems of course is that
it's sometimes difficult to tell the
difference between
a cia media agent and
an ordinary right-wing correspondent who
happens to agree with them
there is a very willing network of of
right-wing journalists who will run with
almost any lead
they get whether it's from the cia or
administration press releases or whatnot
so the fact that dozens of people will
write about yellow reign or the libyan
hit squad or the bulgarian connection so
on
doesn't make them all cia agents
some of them certainly are it's been
estimated that the
the cia has has thousands of journalists
on its
payroll all around the world probably
more foreign correspondents than
ap and upi and tas and reuters put
together
and they spend billions of dollars on it
what about efforts to
discredit the freeze and peace movement
for example
uh claire sterl sterling for example
claire sterling articles in the reader's
digest
editorials in the washington post
suggesting that the women's
international league for peace and
freedom
was a soviet front organization and
things like that
that's actually one of the major
disinformation campaigns of the reagan
administration the attempt to show that
the
peace movement in general and the
nuclear freeze movement in particular
was a kgb plot of some kind and that if
you supported
peace nuclear disarmament the freeze
movement
any of those you were then at best a kgb
dupe and at worst an agent yourself it
was astonishing the lengths to which the
reagan administration went and the
president himself you may recall
there was a time when he suggested that
proof
of the soviet conspiracy
could be found in the fact that people
at u.s peace marches were carrying signs
that had similar slogans to those being
carried
in peace marches in moscow i mean it was
astonishing i mean if someone had a sign
said
uh ban nuclear weapons here and someone
in moscow had such a sign
the president said see that proves that
they're they're really a part of this
this conspiracy
and that was a major thrust of the early
years of the reagan administration
it was muted a little bit once various
disarmament talks started and once there
were summits with gorbachev and so on
but in the early years this was a major
campaign
by the administration all of its media
assets witting and unwitting and
friendly and whatnot were used in it and
there was
just an incredible deluge of articles
about this
in not just in extreme right wing
publications but
centrist publications as well
what about cia efforts to link for
example fidel castro
or the sandinistas with drug trafficking
has that been part of their operation
that's been a major one that's another
interesting case we were talking
earlier about what do you do when when
you're only witnesses are criminals the
the u.s government brought several a
series of indictments
in florida the last being the noriega
one
in which based certainly in the early
indictments based only on the testimony
of
one apparent drug smuggler
who was facing many years in jail uh
they got a statement suggesting that
various cuban and nicaraguan officials
were involved in in drug trafficking
later on the president accused the
sandinista leadership of being involved
in drug trafficking and had that famous
fuzzy picture
of two people holding a box walking
toward an airplane
which he said was one of them was thomas
borge
or some other comandante and of course
they were totally unrecognizable nobody
knew who
anybody was in the picture but more to
the point they were carrying a box which
the president said was filled with
cocaine nobody else said it and of
course nobody had the box
the interesting thing about the the
cuban indictment of the
i mean the the miami indictment of the
cuban officials and others
also had no evidence no exhibit a they
said that they arrested a man coming in
on
a boat who said he was coming in for the
cubans
but that he threw all the drugs
overboard when he saw he was going to be
captured
and he then told them they say what the
drugs were and therefore that became the
evidence
for the drug possession charges uh it's
almost i mean no
no uh respectable prosecutor would go
with such a case they weren't worried of
course because the cuban officials
weren't about to come
surrender themselves to miami officials
for such a trial but it was a ludicrous
case with absolutely no
tangible evidence no physical evidence
at all
and the testimony of one drug smuggler
what were you satisfied with the
iran-contra investigation
no not at all i think that there was
an effort on the part of the
staff people and on the part of most of
the
members of congress involved to limit
how far
they went i think there was a real
damage control operation in a way
it's true that a certain amount of
interesting information
did come out and
that's helpful but i think that for
example
there was a very strong
effort not to let the drug connection
come up every time that
almost reared its ugly head someone
would squelch it
someone would say uh that was classified
information we couldn't deal with it
and nothing about contra drug
trafficking came out of those hearings
also i think that there was
an attempt to focus on what they
considered the
the private end of it the privatizing of
the war the
c chords private company and singh labs
work and so on
without really trying to get into the
question of whether c chord and sing lab
and the rest
weren't in fact not private at all but
were doing what they were doing for the
government
and also without looking into other
operations and other people the
the weapons dealing that was touched
upon was the tip of the iceberg as far
as we can tell there have certainly been
a lot of reports
of vastly more uh
gigantic and complicated weapons deals
taking place which weren't touched upon
by the committee i mean one of the
problems is that
is that there were former cia
officials who were on the staff of the
committee who were certainly not there
to make sure that the cia got
got zapped and the other
uh perhaps fortuitous thing that
happened for them was
casey's illness and death so that a
great deal was blamed on
casey and a great deal of people were
able to say a great number of people
were able to say well casey knew that
and he didn't tell the president or he
didn't tell someone else or he didn't do
something about it so they had a very
convenient
scapegoat in that sense i think that
uh there were there were a number of
other levels on which i thought the
hearings were very bad i thought there
was a great deal of
fawning over people like
oliver north and c chord and so on and
every member of the committee was
was tripping over his own feet in order
to say what great patriots i thought
they were
they had the nerve to bring on one of
the
cuban exiles who had been responsible
for blowing up the
cubana airliner and killing 70 or 80
innocent people
and treat him like he was a hero they
had
a lot of really shabby characters on who
were involved in
vast amounts of law breaking and were
treating them like like patriots and and
at worst misguided patriots
and i i think they were you know a
far greater bunch of sleazeballs then
the committee would ever deal with them
the only person who ever said anything
touching on what i thought was a central
issue was the one time
when when senator anyway started to
mention the nuremberg principles
and and the nuremberg principles are
something that should always be
mentioned when you're talking about the
contrast because we're supporting a
force that that's
uh violating them but they
they um north's lawyer jumped and
screamed and and
the point was ended
did you learn anything from bob did you
learn anything from bob woodward's book
vail
a little bit it's has some
interesting insights the problem is that
i think
i wouldn't call it damage control but i
think that the book
has its problems in being too
on the one hand personalizing things too
much with casey as if as if
casey was doing everything and
also i think it imputes too much
good faith on the part of all the other
people around him
he tries to i think he's far too kind to
the cia in the book
and i think the motivations of a lot of
people were much worse than
what he says i'm told from reviews i've
read by other people that there are
there are some errors in it there are
mistakes in it there are things that
that woodward just has wrong
and of course it's it's um a bit of a
self-serving puff piece in a way also i
mean there's
uh it's almost like a book about bob
woodward rather than a book about
iran gate which is a bit of a problem
and of course he made
quite a fortune on it and had all sorts
of uh
television and radio and newspaper
coverage of himself as the person doing
that story and it was a real hype job i
don't think it's that
critical a book it's probably of some
value to people who really don't know
much about the subject because they can
learn a bit the trouble is they also
won't have any idea
where he's most accurate and where he's
least accurate
in the summer 1987 covert action and
information bulletin editorial
you write that the cia involvement in
chemical biological warfare
cbw research and development
a number of researchers have raised the
possibility that
the aids epidemic is the result either
intended or accidental of chemical
biological warfare work
and you add the evidence is very strong
that nature alone is not responsible for
aids
that's pretty explosive stuff well
it is uh it's a pretty
serious world problem the the aids
epidemic and we were
looking into the possibility of some cbw
connections because
it there were many people raising this
many people suspecting it
of course many of those people were not
trained doctors or scientists and simply
had a
because they they know there's been this
kind of work in the past
because things can get loose there was
a lot of speculation and we investigated
and published several
articles dealing with the history of
chemical biological warfare research
with the
possibility that the aids
syndrome might be caused by something
that was a result
of of that kind of research it's very
complicated because the medical
testimony is
contradictory there are scientists who
say
that the virus the hiv
virus which is referred to as the cause
of aids there are scientists which say
it's not the cause of aids
that some other toxic combination
is the cause of aids there are others
who say that yes hiv is the cause of
aids but it's not a natural virus it's a
genetically engineered virus
and there are others who say no it's not
a genetically engineered virus obviously
if if it is a genetically engineered
substance then the cbw connection is
obvious then that means that
something which has something to do with
aids was made in a laboratory
whether it was deliberate or accidental
is another thing that's very hard to
tell you can't
there are people who think that aids
might well be deliberate
uh there are other people who think that
that's too fantastic even for the cia
that they would have deliberately loosed
something like that
and we decided to run a survey of all
these different theories
because uh of the seriousness of the
problem and because of the
the extent to which these questions are
being raised
and the fact is that uh we there was no
definitive
conclusion there is
a strong likelihood that the the aids
epidemic has
some connection to
man-made activity of one kind or another
it may be
a byproduct of other things it may be
environmental in the sense there are
there are many people who think that uh
defoliants and chemicals like dioxin and
so on might be
connected with with the uh initiation or
the spread of aids there are other
people who who feel that way about
the chemicals that are used in
connection with food and so on
you have been a practicing attorney for
more than 20 years and your view
then the evidence is still at this point
speculative it's not conclusive
with respect to a cbw connection yeah
it's still it's still not conclusive
uh it's it's very hard to say it's
certainly
clear that it has some connections
beyond
a traditional virus it's fairly clear
that there are cofactors involved
and when there are cofactors involved
and it's not a simple virus it's not the
simple
thing that one person catches from
another person regardless of
other factors it may have to do with all
the chemicals we use and all the poisons
that are in the air and the water and
the food
it may have to do with um
with laboratory work we just we just
can't tell the
the point we wanted to make in really
analyzing it thoroughly
was that this is not a far-fetched crazy
idea
the cia has been involved
in very very bizarre chemical biological
warfare research for
many many years and the army has a whole
numerous secret uh installations dealing
with that
they they always refer to them as as
defensive research because they're
saying we have to study cbw because
maybe the russians will use it against
us
the problem of course is that offensive
and defensive research in the cbw field
are identical
it's exactly the same research and they
can
call it defensive when in fact they're
doing exactly the same thing they would
be doing if they called it offensive
there have been cases before of things
getting loose there there
there have been uh accidents with with
nerve gas
research all the the sheep and the cows
that died in utah that time uh when
something got loose these these things
do happen
there they make science fiction movies
about them so that people tend to think
that
it really doesn't happen in real life
but it does and it's such a serious
problem that really has to be
looked at we felt that the what we
published was was a fairly sober
reflection of of the possibilities
without jumping to conclusions but
pointing out all the
aberrations in in the data to to make
people think
what about cia activities on u.s college
campuses and universities
well that continues to be a major
operation on their part recruiting is
the lifeblood of any intelligence
agency the cia has always been a major
college recruiter they don't
generally take on people uh later in
life they like to take people right
after they're out of college or or maybe
out of graduate school
and expect them to adopt the cia
as a lifetime career and they
consequently
uh recruit on every major campus in the
country
except that the handful where the
student protests have been so strong
that uh
they're not allowed to and the very very
few where the administrations of those
colleges have gone along with it and
also
forbidden open recruiting of course they
they do uh secret recruiting even even
where they're not
allowed to to openly recruit but that's
that's how they
survive that's how they get new people
is is getting people right out of
college particularly because
they need if they're going to build up
cover stories for undercover
operatives you have to start from the
beginning you can't have someone have
half a career that's a legitimate career
and then all of a sudden switch them
into
some undercover career which will be
totally inconsistent with the first part
of their adult life
what about placing agents in in
departments
one of the most important things the cia
does in connection with recruiting
is trying to build up
a large number of what they call
spotters
generally professors academics teaching
on campuses
with whom they establish a friendly
enough relationship
so that the professor will tell them who
of his or her students might be likely
candidates to recruit
people who won't think to apply for the
cia or to show up at the recruiting if
it's a campus where they have that kind
of recruiting
but who the professor thinks might be
might be worthwhile material for them
and then they will arrange various
elaborate ways to
slowly and very gingerly approach those
students
that's a very important thing they do is
that and i think a very corrupt practice
on the part of the academics who go
along with it
using a professor to tell the cia who
they should recruit is
is pretty low down and in most cases
the professors would never dream of
letting higher ups in in the university
know they were doing such a thing
there's an example at the university of
california at santa barbara in the fall
of 1987 the spring of 1988 as we speak
now
of an actual agent who has been
appointed to the
faculty staff but that's that's openly
admitted
at this point that's that's somewhat
different from there have been many
times when cia people
have been told undercover to get
academic posts
but not to say that they're cia not to
let people know that to pretend that
they're
retired state department personnel
depending on what their cover may have
been
i don't i think it's a pretty shaky idea
to begin with i think
most people well of course it's my
personal
view and i view a lot of people who
agree with me that the cia is a pretty
immoral organization and people who stay
with it for any length of time have have
been involved in
very immoral work for a long time and
wouldn't in my opinion make the best
professors uh not everyone agrees with
that and certainly in schools of uh
public relate not public relations
international relations diplomacy and so
on
people will want to hear from cia
folks because uh that's that's part of
the real world they want to know what
they have to say
i don't think any if i were connected
with some university i would not
want it to be hiring people from the cia
what are your views on the daniel
sheehan christic institute case and i
asked that question
and preface it by saying that john
stockwell and ralph mcgehee two former
cia agents jonathan quit me
who writes for the wall street journal
and is the author of crime of the
patriots and many others
have been very critical and have
approached
the sheehan case with great caution
what are your views on it well i share
that
caution to a large extent i think that
the
the thrust of the case is good and
correct i think the line that it's
showing is generally speaking correct i
think the problem is that it that it
overreaches a bit i think it tries to
prove
too much and it tries to connect too
many things
it's it's always a problem dealing with
intelligence operations and particularly
the cia because
the the truth generally turns out to be
at least as strange
as we might have imagined it to be and
usually even stranger
and you can't
reject something by saying no that's too
far-fetched the cia would never do such
a thing because in fact
they will do the most the most
far-fetched things but i think in
the particulars of this case over
overstate things i think there are some
conclusions that are drawn without
enough
evidence to fill in the gaps i don't
know if that's going to hurt or
or help in terms of the the prosecution
of the case as a case because
we have to remember that on the one hand
it's it's a
vehicle for getting across a theory
about a long long history of
intelligence operations but on the other
hand it's also a damaged suit
uh by injured individuals against a
group of people who they say were
responsible for injuring them
directly or indirectly so that on that
level
all of this may not be a significant
problem the trouble i think is that if
students of the
intelligence operations take everything
in this
case as as gospel i think they'll be
wrong in a number of particulars just
because it's too much and it's too
complicated
you've been reluctant to write about
this in covert action
well there's a problem as i said i think
their
their motivations are good i think the
people involved are coming from the
right
uh place i think we're all
opposed in principle as moral principle
to the work of the cia we're against the
cia
doing what it does and i don't want to
really have squabbles with my friends
when i've got enough to do
with my enemies and i think most of us
progressive workers in this field feel
the same way
um it's it's not
really necessary to spend
you know that much time trying to trying
to punch holes in it i'm hoping that as
they do more investigation they'll fill
in more of the pieces of the jigsaw
puzzle and everything they do come up
with in all the documentary evidence
they do obtain
is going to help all the rest of us uh i
mean it's practically a life's work for
a lot of people that are spending all
their time
on that case and the rest of us are
dealing dealing with other things
but i there's enough to do uh
uh working against the the forces of the
reagan administration and the forces of
the cia than
the to to worry about what in in many
ways are minor differences among
those of us on the other side another
story making the rounds of the
alternative press and media is the
so-called october surprise
originally divulged by barbara hanaga
britain who was a reagan campaign
staffer there was an article in these
times christopher hitchens wrote a
couple of articles about it in the
nation
and flora lewis picked up on it in the
new york times do you have any
information on it
well i find it believable
and consistent with other investigations
that we've done because
it's it fits with
the what we've uncovered in a related
area
and that had to do with delta force and
the
the attempted rescue of the hostages in
april of
80 several months
previously we came to the conclusion
that there was a very good chance that
that operation
was doomed to failure for before it was
even planned that the people who planned
it knew it was doomed to failure and
that they may have
commenced an operation they knew was
going to fail precisely because it would
embarrass
president carter and hurt him in the
election and if
there were forces capable of doing that
they certainly could have had the the
power to at least try to arrange
some situation where hostages would not
be released before the election
and i i i was not involved in
investigating the october surprise so i
don't know
the the depth uh to which they that was
looked into it
what i'm really saying is that it's
plausible because i think the hostage
attempt was
was botched on purpose maybe not that
when i say botched on purpose i mean it
was set up by people who knew it was
wasn't going to succeed i don't think
the people out there in the desert
flying the helicopters and certainly not
the people who got killed i don't think
they knew
it wasn't going to succeed but i think
they were sent on something that was
pretty close to a suicide mission
where do you see yourself and covert
action in the kaleidoscope
in the kaleidoscope of alternative media
well there's no question that covert
action is a
somewhat specialized magazine we're
certainly not a mass readership
type magazine we've never tried to be
that degree of popular we
view ourselves as a research tool we
generally publish
articles in a relatively scholarly
format lots of footnotes lots of
citations and references
because it's the kind of thing that most
of our readers save and use later for
reference
purposes and we've tried to
avoid too much speculation occasionally
you have to speculate like in the aids
articles and we say that we're
speculating
but we've tried to do investigative
reporting of a kind that could be done
by mainstream journalists but with rare
exception isn't
simply because their publishers won't
run the material
and we're all motivated by a desire to
limit what the cia and related
organizations do to try to stop them
from
conduct we consider is is immoral as
well as illegal
and there's certainly going to be plenty
for us to keep doing these these
no matter who becomes president
uh who gets elected this year it's it's
not going to
change the operations of the secret
services very much how many subscribers
do you have nationally and
internationally and how do you keep the
magazine going
well a magazine is pretty much
self-sustaining at this point
from sales once in a while we
will get some contributions from from
wealthier friends or from a very small
foundation uh not too often now we've
reached a point where
subscription sales and newsstand sales
pretty much cover the
the cost of operation we've been going
now for for
almost 10 years it'll be our 10th
anniversary very soon
and that was not the case in the
beginning and with every issue we had to
scramble around and try and borrow money
from friends or just
dig into our own pockets and keep it
going but now we have
over 10 000 circulation and
between 10 and 12 000 ironically
compared to most
magazines the the larger the majority of
our of our circulation is newsstand
sales rather than
subscribers which in fact is unfortunate
for us because newsstand sales you make
much less money as a
magazine publisher because you have to
give the middleman and the distributor
and the news dealer and so on
percentages
uh that it's very unusual no other
magazine we know of of our
kind it has that situation it's it's
probably because
uh people are don't want to be on our
mailing list because they're afraid the
the government can find out who's on
your mailing list and that
of course that's true i mean we we have
to use the post office to mail things
out there's nobody else we can take our
mailing business to um and so we've
we've
we've lived with that and although the
the subscription list increases very
very slowly the overall circulation
including newsstand sales has increased
substantially
over the years have there have there
been any instances where you have been
hassled or mysterious phone calls
surveillance do you have any information
on that affecting you or any of your
colleagues
we're virtually certain that the phones
are tapped in the offices are bugged and
that's been the case for many many years
but all of us involved have been
political activists for a long time and
we're not
unused to that it's it's quite common
you get you get used to assuming that
your phone is
is uh tapped it's not a big deal uh
when we're not involved in in planning
or committing crimes so we're not too
worried about it anyway
but if we want to talk about a story
that's going to appear in the magazine
and we don't want people to know about
it beforehand then
you don't talk about it on the phone
we've had some
weird phone calls very very few compared
to other organizations and we've had
occasional very strange visitors more
often than we get the other way around
which is the extremely friendly
people who want to come and help and
volunteer and take care of the office
and
do all sorts of things for us and are
just so eager to volunteer that they've
got to be uh
agents and uh of course we're not a
membership organization so these people
don't uh
get to join up with us too easily the
the only kind of
substantive harassment we've had is an
occasion
shipments of the magazine have been
mislaid or misdirected and things get
lost and and
very often with a considerable
selectiveness
when we ran an issue about the bulgarian
connection which was very much
related to europe the whole packet of
magazine that
went to europe to be sub distributed out
there
disappeared and we didn't find out about
it for a long time and then we had to
resend the whole uh
packages magazines and occasionally
specific ones that will be of interest
to particular people
journalists researchers academics or
whatever won't arrive
and it can't all be because they've got
an angry mailman who sees it and
rips it up so that those things happen
but they're they're fairly minor
inconveniences and something nothing
compared to what most
political activists are are used to
certainly nothing like what happens to
victims of cointelpro what happens to
groups like cispes when the fbi
does all that to him and you've set up
the institute for media analysis which
now
also publishes books and and sponsors uh
public talks
right this is a totally separate
organization uh with some overlap in
people but not
not totally so the the institute for
media analysis is a
a new york non-profit corporation
which does essentially educational work
investigating disinformation and
propaganda
and publishes scholarly monographs
runs seminars and conferences and does
research services for
journalists for academics for for other
researchers
and we've a group of us that have a
certain amount of expertise in
in issues of propaganda and
disinformation have got together to
to do that and that's uh works somewhat
separately again you run into some of
the same people
because a lot of the disinformation and
propaganda that we investigate at the
institute
are are very close to if not uh
precisely intelligence operations that
that we might have been investigating as
covert action information bulletin so
there's a there's a certain amount of uh
overlap there uh as i mentioned before
the media and propaganda operations are
one of the major
facets of cia work and and hundreds of
millions of dollars are spent every year
in that kind of
in that kind of work we're sitting here
in your office in new york and there are
photographs of fidel castro and che
guevara and maurice bishop
are do these men inspire you
well i i never knew che guevara i find
a lot about his life that i've learned
to be to be somewhat inspirational
maurice bishop was a personal friend of
my wife and myself we knew him before he
became prime minister of grenada and was
an extremely
uh inspiring person whom we admired
greatly and i certainly
i think that that fidel castro is one of
the
um more brilliant world leaders around
today someone who's
had to deal with incredible difficulties
very successfully over the years i mean
of course you you didn't
mention i've got uh paul robeson on the
wall and i've got veto marc antonio and
i've got
samuel yoma and sean mcbride and sacco
and vanzetti and
madame bien and a few other people on
the wall uh
not too many of whom we knew we knew
personally but uh
yes i think that there's a certain
amount of inspiration to be
to be got from uh particularly
people like the cubans who who have
successfully battled the cia people like
the vietnamese who have successfully
battled the
the entire massive might of the united
states
one of the things we're often asked is
is isn't it discouraging don't you
really find it just
terribly down to be working against the
cia and such a powerful
machinery and the fact is that they're
not all powerful and
and over time they keep losing and
third world peoples uh without
any comparable technology
do win so that's inspiring in a sense by
itself
regardless of individuals who are
some people active in the media writing
today that inspire you here in the
united states
well i think the in the work we do
some of the best stuff has been done by
noam chomsky and ed herman
who are phenomenal researchers of the
media
and who are able to
analyze the way the new york times will
deal with a subject for example the way
the major networks will cover a topic
in a way that that very few other people
do
partly i guess because of their training
or certainly chomsky's training in
semantics and linguistics and so on
but it's very difficult work to
expose something where the
disinformation is
not something simple like
flipping a fact and making making
something white instead of black or
yes instead of no but where the the
disinformation involves the
more subtle means they're they're
excellent at
analyzing that in both international
coverage and
and domestic coverage in terms of
day-to-day journalists
in the newspapers there aren't very many
who uh who specialize in this
in this kind of work alex coburn uh i
i think is is one of the other geniuses
in
in this area who he also happens to be a
magnificent writer
regardless of the subject and i find
that uh
uh quite quite inspiring but most of the
the major media can they might have
people working for them who
who would uncover these things and write
about them if they were allowed to but
normally uh
they don't when you get somebody like
ray bonner at the times who was writing
about what was really happening in el
salvador and how it wasn't being covered
that way in this country
he ended up being being forced out of
his job because he was
exposing what was going on and uh
it it's it's extremely difficult in this
country for
mainstream journalists uh however
well-meaning they may be to really deal
with this issue
give our listeners a contact address for
covert action
absolutely anyone who wants to write us
can write to
po box 50272
washington dc 2004
or they can write to us in new york at
west 4th street new york new york 1001
that's the address of the institute for
media analysis let me let me repeat it
new york is 145
west 4th street new york 1001.2
and washington is box 50272
washington dc 2004
thank you my guest has been bill schapp
editor of covert action and information
bulletin and director of the institute
for media analysis in new york i'm david
barcelon
thank you for listening